# 7.6.1 -> 7.8 upgrade

## Get and analyze release notes

### Feature Enhancements
Feature enhancements in release 7.6.1.0 include the following:


- **[OAuth 2 support for Google connector](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.6/Ult/Administration_Guide/System/#Setting_Connector_Properties "OAuth 2 authentication for Google connector")** OAuth 2 authentication is now supported for Google connector.
- **[Collapse all subpanels option](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.6/Ult/Administration_Guide/System/#User_Interface "Collapse all subpanels option")** : Administrators now have the option to collapse all subpanels in Sidecar modules by default via Admin > System Settings.
- **List View performance improvements** : Experience faster load times when viewing and filtering Sidecar module list views.
- **Process Author enhanced user variables** : Process definition criteria can now be filtered by whether or not the record owner was the user who created or last modified the record.
- **Process Author timed elements** : Wait events in process definitions can now be configured relative to a record's date created and/or date modified.

Feature enhancements in release 7.7.0.0 include the following. To view new features added for versions 7.5.0.0 through 7.6.0.0, please refer to the [Sugar 7.6.0.0 Release Notes](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.6/Ult/Sugar_7.6.0.0_Release_Notes/ "Sugar Ultimate 7.6.0.0 Release Notes").


- **[Improvements to Global Search](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Application_Guide/Search/#Global_Search "Search")** : Improvements have been made to the Global Search user interface and functionality (e.g. search tags, etc.).
- **[Knowledge Base user interface](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Application_Guide/Knowledge_Base/ "Knowledge Base")** : The Knowledge Base module now uses the Sidecar user interface.
- **[Tag Management](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Administration_Guide/Tag_Management "Tag Management")** : Users with administrator or developer access can utilize the Tags module to manage the system-wide tag repository.
- **[Tagging](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Application_Guide/Tags/#Working_With_Tags "Tags")**  : Sidecar modules contain a Tags field where users can create and share tags which can be used to identify records in filters, dashlets, and reports.
- **[Additional lead conversion options](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Application_Guide/Leads/#Steps_to_Convert_a_Lead "Leads")**  : Leads can now be converted by clicking the Unconverted button in the Leads record view, as well as by selecting the Convert option from the Leads subpanel actions menu.
- [**Automatically associate module during lead conversion**](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Application_Guide/Leads/#Steps_to_Convert_a_Lead) : Records will now be automatically associated during lead conversion if no duplicate records are found.
- [**Lead Conversion Options setting**](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Administration_Guide/System/#User_Interface "System"): The Lead Conversion Options setting is now available in Admin > System Settings to handle activity records during lead conversion.
- **[Collapse all subpanels option](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Administration_Guide/System/#User_Interface "System")** : Administrators now have the option to collapse all subpanels in Sidecar modules by default via Admin > System Settings.
- **Configuring team sets in process definitions** : Administrators can now append and replace teams via Change Fields and Add Related Record actions.
- **[Link to records in process emails](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Administration_Guide/Process_Author/Process_Email_Templates/#Using_the_Related_Link_Selector_Tool)** : Related record URLs may now be embedded in process email templates.
- **Configuring team sets in workflows**  : Administrators can now differentiate between a record's primary team and its current team set in workflows.
- **[Contact Type filter criteria added to D&B Build a List](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Application_Guide/Contacts/#People_Filter_Panel "Contacts")** : The Contact Type field is now available as a filter criteria in the D&B People panel.
- **[D&B Usage Meter dashlet](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Application_Guide/User_Interface/Intelligence_Pane#DB_Usage_Meter "Intelligence Pane")** : The D&B Usage Meter dashlet is now available to view a summary of used and remaining credit information for each available metered service (e.g. Accounts, Family Tree, etc.).
- **[GU DUNS filter criteria added to D&B Build a List](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Application_Guide/Accounts/#Company_Information_Filter_Panel "Accounts")**  : The GU DUNS field is now available as a filter criteria in the D&B Company Information panel.
- **Expanded list views preserved** : Filtered list views with "More records..." loaded remain expanded after in-line edits are saved.
- **Group reports by week** : Summation Report, Summation Report with Details, and Matrix Report can now be grouped by "Week" for Date and Datetime fields (e.g. Start Date, Date Created, etc.).
- **Intelligent subpanel filters for Cases module**  : When linking records via the Contacts subpanel in the Cases record view, the Search and Add Contacts drawer will automatically be filtered to only display contact records associated to the case's parent account.
- **[Move recipients across To, CC, and BCC fields](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Application_Guide/Emails/#Composing_Emails "Emails")** : Recipients can now be dragged and dropped across the To, CC, and BCC fields in the Compose Email window for Sidecar modules.
- **Move To BCC option** : The Move To BCC option is now available when composing emails in the Emails module.
- **[Notification count in favicon](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Application_Guide/User_Interface/#Notifications "User Interface")** : The favicon (SugarCRM cube icon) in the browser tab now displays the same number corresponding to the count in the notifications box.
- **Quotes Bill To and Ship To subpanels** : The Quotes (Bill To) and Quotes (Ship To) subpanels are now available in the Accounts and Contacts record views in order to display the related quote records accordingly.
- **Search filter support for multiple Assigned to users**  : Multiple users can now be selected when creating search filters using the Assigned to field in Sidecar modules.
- **[Timestamp for forecast's commit history](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Application_Guide/Forecasts/#Summary_and_Commit_History)** : The Forecast module's commit history now displays a timestamp.
- **[Total record count](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Application_Guide/User_Interface/#Total_Record_Count "User Interface")** : The total count of records are now available in Module list views, Subpanel list views, as well as Search and Select list views.
- **Tracker support for Sidecar modules** : Tracker sessions are now logged for Sidecar modules.
- **[Traditional Chinese language supported](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Application_Guide/Getting_Started#Setting_Your_Language "Getting Started")** : Users may now choose the traditional Chinese language as their preferred language in Sugar.
- **User selection list sort order** : User selection lists previously sorted by username are now sorted by last name, first name.
- **PHPMailer** : PHPMailer is now being installed by composer and upgraded to version 5.2.9.
- **Record view performance improvement** : Improvements have been made to load record view layouts faster when multiple dropdown fields and values exist in the layout.
- **[Additional option for SAML authentication](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Administration_Guide/Password_Management#SAML "Password Management")** : The "Load login screen in same window to avoid pop-up blocking" option can now be enabled via Admin > Password Management to load the SAML login screen in the current window and prevent pop-up blockers from disallowing single sign-on.
- **SimpleSAMLphp library 2.6.1 supported**  : SimpleSAMLphp library 2.6.1 is now supported in Sugar.
- **[Knowledge Base Categories & Published Articles dashlet on Knowledge Base list view in portal](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Portal_User_Guide/#Knowledge_Base_List_View)** : The Knowledge Base Categories & Published Articles dashlet is now available on the Knowledge Base list view in the portal.
- **Sugar logic support for portal** : Sugar logic is now supported in the portal.
- **[Upgrade support on all database stacks](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Versions/7.7/Ult/Installation_and_Upgrade_Guide/#Upgrade_Prerequisites "Sugar 7.7 Installation and Upgrade Guide")** : Upgrades are now supported on all database stacks (MySQL, DB2, Oracle, MSSQL).

Feature enhancements in release 7.7.1.0 include the following:


- **[PHP 5.6 Support](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Resources/Supported_Platforms/Sugar_7.7.x_Supported_Platforms/)**  : PHP version 5.6 is now supported in Sugar.

### Development changes
Changes in release 7.6.1.0 which may affect developers include the following:


- CSRF tokens for form submissions are now supported.
- The Duration field in the Calls and Meetings modules has been changed to a select-list field.

Developer-level feature enhancements in release 7.6.2.1 include the following:


- **Language file hierarchy** : The order that language strings are loaded from the file system has changed. See the [Sugar Developer Guide](http://support.sugarcrm.com/Documentation/Sugar_Developer/Sugar_Developer_Guide_7.6/Language_Framework/Application_Labels_and_Lists) for more details on the updates language file hierarchy.

Changes in release 7.7.0.0 which may affect developers include the following:


- SSL connections are now supported for connecting to MySQL databases.
- A new lead's Status field is no longer hard coded to "New" in the bean's `save()` method. The default status value for new leads can now be controlled using metadata as in other dropdown fields.
- The previously deprecated `DBHelper` class has been removed in Sugar 7.7. Developers should rely on the `DBManager` class instead.
- The `side-pane` layout has been removed from default layout metadata used throughout the application. The `side-pane` layout was not used in the Sugar application and was therefore superfluous. This change does not affect the `dashboard-pane` or the `preview-pane` layouts.
- The deprecated `timeago` Handlebars helper has been removed. This helper has been deprecated since Sugar 7.2.0. Developers should use the `relativeTime` Handlebars helper instead.
- A new currency `SugarObject` implementation has been introduced that can be used in Vardefs. This makes it easier to add consistent currency field support to any Sugar module. To use it, add the `currencyimplementation` into the `VardefManager::createVardefcall` within a module's Vardefs as shown below:

  `<pre class="">VardefManager::createVardef(<br></br>    'Opportunities',<br></br>    'Opportunity',<br></br>    array(<br></br>        'default',<br></br>        'assignable',<br></br>        'team_security',<br></br>        'currency'<br></br>    )<br></br>);`
- The Sidecar bean `getSyncedAttributes()` function has been deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Developers should instead use `getSynced()` which has a different signature and allows you to check for specific attributes or retrieve them all.
- Significant changes have been made to the Lead Convert panel in order to support automatically associating modules during lead conversion and to allow related activities to be moved. Existing customizations to the Lead Convert panel may not work after upgrade. Developers should verify that any existing customizations to the following Sidecar components work in a sandbox prior to upgrading: `convert-main`, `convert-panel`, `convert-headerpane`, `convert-options`, and `convert-panel-header`.
- Global Search has been changed to use a new view containing new code. Developers who have customized the previous view will need to manually migrate their changes.
- The "Rebuild Minified JS Files", "Rebuild JS Compressed Files", and "Repair JS Files"options have been removed from Admin > Repair. These actions can be triggered manually if necessary. See [this post](http://developer.sugarcrm.com/2016/04/04/handling-of-javascript-files-in-sugar-7-7/) for more details.
- The Duration fields in the Calls and Meetings modules have been changed to Integer fields.
- The `getSyncedAttributes()` has been deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Developers should instead use `getSynced()` which has a different signature and allows you to check for specific attributes or retrieve them all.
- The following config parameters have been added to support application-level caching in the database: `external_cache_force_backend`, `cache_expire_timeout`, `external_cache_db_gc_probability`, and `external_cache_disabled_db`.
- The config parameter `SAML_provisionUser` has been added to define whether non-existing users should be auto-provisioned in Sugar when logging in via SAML.
- CSRF tokens for form submissions are now supported.
- API requests will not return records in excess of the "Listview items per page" setting in Admin > System Settings which is known in the config file as `list_max_entries_per_page`.
- A new API endpoint `/globalsearch` has been added. For compatibility, the older `/search` API is still available.
- The following entrypoints have been added to the REST API:
  - `GET /rest/v10/Administration/search/status`
  - `GET /rest/v10/Administration/search/fields`
  - `POST /rest/v10/Administration/search/reindex`
  - `GET /rest/v10/Administration/elasticsearch/mapping`
  - `GET /rest/v10/Administration/elasticsearch/indices`
  - `GET /rest/v10/Administration/elasticsearch/routing`
  - `GET /rest/v10/Administration/elasticsearch/queue`
- The Relationships module has been deprecated. Developers should now be using `SugarRelationshipFactory` to manage bean relationships. The Relationships table has been removed because it was superfluous.
- Additional password hashing methods have been added and can be configured using `$sugar_config`.
- A change has been made to Sugar's API to no longer JSON encode database-stored settings except for arrays. This may affect custom PHP code which reads administrative config settings which were previously unnecessarily JSON encoded. Values which appear to be JSON encoded (i.e. begin with `{, [, "`) will now be JSON decoded.
- The `usePreparedStatements` config flag has been deprecated. The use of prepared statements will be implemented and enforced in a future release.
- The help page documentation for the `MassDelete` API cal has been corrected.
- Sidecar modules now support the `AssignToUserAction` Sugar Logic action.
- Developers who have created custom Sugar field types should obey a new `ellipsis_inline` setting used in Sugar Field metadata to ensure the field displays properly in different views. This can be tested by adding your custom field type to a Global search (where `ellipsis_inline` is false) or List views (where `ellipsis_inline` is true).
- The `partial` Handlebars helper now requires mandatory `component` and `context` values. The signature is now `partial 'name' component object custom=options` where `'name'` is the name of the partial template (unchanged), `component` is the component used (e.g. layout, field, or view), `object` is the context, and `custom=options` are the hashed options (unchanged).
- The jQuery UI library has been upgraded to version 1.11. Developers should re-test any custom code that makes direct use of jQuery UI APIs to ensure there are no unanticipated changes in behavior.
- The `app.utils.addNumberSeperators` API has been deprecated and will be removed in 7.9. It is replaced by `app.utils.addNumberSeparators` which has the same functionality and signature.
- The behavior of the `SugarAnalytics` API has been altered to improve performance. Existing customizations that use Analytics API functions may need to be updated.
- The `currentModule` property in the config-drawer layout `ConfigDrawerLayout` has been deprecated. The `this.module` property should be used instead.
- Customizable filter operators are now available on a per-module basis using metadata. For an example, see `modules/KBContents/clients/base/filters/operators/operators.php`.
- Sidecar's `View.Views.Base.PasswordmodalView` has been deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Developers should ensure they are not using or customizing this view which was only used in Sugar Portal.
- PHP 4 constructors have been deprecated in common `SugarBean` classes for Bugs, Cases, Contacts, etc. For example, use `Bug::__construct()` instead of `Bug::Bug()`
- Use of `CreateActionsLayout` and `CreateActionsView` (create-actions) has been deprecated in favor of `CreateLayout` and `CreateView` (create). The Sugar upgrade wizard will make a best effort migration of deprecated `create-actions` customizations. Refer to [this post](http://developer.sugarcrm.com/2015/12/29/update-on-createactionsview-changes-in-sugar-7-7/) for more details.
- For Knowledge Base Categories module, new REST APIs were added for reading and manipulating KB category hierarchies.
- A new boolean configuration setting `SAML_provisionUser` has been added that allows administrators to control SAML user auto provisioning. This setting is enabled (i.e. set to "true") by default.
- The `Select2` library used within the Sugar user interface has been upgraded to version 3.5.2. `Select2` is used to display drop down fields, etc. Refer to the [Select2 page on GitHub](https://github.com/select2/select2/tree/3.5.2) for more information. Developers should re-test any custom code that makes direct use of `Select2` APIs to ensure there are no unanticipated changes in behavior.
- A new config setting `rest_response_etag_cache_age` has been added that allows you to control the max-age value for the Cache-Control response header on REST API endpoints that support HTTP caching.
- Cross Site Request Forgery (CSRF) authentication has been added and can be enabled using a config setting, though it will be required in future Sugar versions. Developers need to use CSRF tokens on HTML forms used in Sugar's legacy modules. Refer to [this post](http://developer.sugarcrm.com/2015/12/01/csrf-tokens-in-sugar-7-7/) for more details
- The `$_SESSION` object is no longer a standard PHP array but an object that implements the `ArrayAccess` interface. Because of this, developers should no longer use standard PHP array utility functions to access the `$_SESSION` object. Refer to [this post](http://developer.sugarcrm.com/2016/01/11/php-session-changes-in-sugar-7-7/) for more details.
- Sugar's Global Search framework now includes support for Elasticsearch Aggregations. Aggregation results based on Module, Assigned User, etc, can be returned by global search queries that include `xmod_args=true` parameter. Query results can also be filtered based on these aggregation buckets.
- As part of the new tagging feature, a new `tag` field type has been introduced as well as a `taggable` SugarObject template that can be used to add tagging support to Sugar modules.
- The Sugar REST v10 `POST <module>/filter/count` endpoint has been deprecated. The equivalent `GET <module>/filter/count` endpoint should be used instead.
- Developers can now register multiple HTTP verbs at once for a single REST endpoint. When registering REST API endpoints using `SugarApi::registerApiRest`, the `reqType` parameter now supports passing an array of HTTP verbs. Refer to the example below:
  `<pre class="">public function registerApiRest() {<br></br>  return array(<br></br>    'ping' => array( <br></br>     'reqType' => array('GET', 'POST'),<br></br>      'path' => array('ping'),<br></br>      'pathVars' => array(''),<br></br>      'method' => 'ping',<br></br>      'shortHelp' => 'An example API only responds with pong',       <br></br>      'longHelp' => 'include/api/help/ping_get_help.html',<br></br>    ),<br></br>  );<br></br>}`
- For Logic Hooks, it is now possible to use PHP namespaces to define your hook class. When a namespaced class is used, the `file_path` parameter should be left null. Refer to the example below:
  ```
  <pre class="">$hook_array['after_save'][] = array(
    1,
    'example logic hook',
    null,
    'Sugarcrm\\Sugarcrm
    MyClass',
    'myMethod'
  );
  ```

Changes in release 7.7.1.0 which may affect developers include the following:


- A Command Line Interface (CLI) tool, located at `bin/sugarcrm`, and associated CLI framework has been added to the Sugar application. This CLI framework is in Beta so there could be significant changes to it in upcoming Sugar releases. This framework allows you to register commands using a new application-level Console extension point or by registering them using Composer.
- With the introduction of a new input validation framework, two new Sugar Config settings have been added, `validation.soft_fail` and `validation.compat_mode`. These settings are `true` by default to ensure compatibility, but these defaults will change in a future Sugar release. For more information, please refer to the Developer Guide or this SugarCON [security breakout presentation](https://community.sugarcrm.com/docs/DOC-3471).
- The following PHP methods and classes have been deprecated in order to add future support for prepared statements:

  - `SugarVisibility::addVisibilityFrom()`, `SugarVisibility::addVisibilityWhere()`, and `SugarVisibility::addVisibilityFromQuery()` have been deprecated. Use `SugarQuery` and `SugarVisibility::addVisibilityQuery()` instead.
  - `BeanVisibility::addVisibilityFrom()`, `BeanVisibility::addVisibilityWhere()`, and `BeanVisibility::addVisibilityFromQuery()` have been deprecated. Use `SugarQuery` and `BeanVisibility::addVisibilityQuery()` instead.
  - `SugarQuery_Builder_Delete` has been deprecated. Use `SugarBean::mark_deleted()` instead.
  - `SugarQuery_Builder_Insert` and `SugarQuery_Builder_Update` have been deprecated. Use `SugarBean::save()` instead.
  - `SugarQuery_Builder_Literal` has been deprecated. There is not alternative because the class was never fully implemented.
  - `SugarQuery_Compiler` has been deprecated. Use `SugarQuery_Compiler_SQL` instead.
  - `SugarQuery::joinRaw()` has been deprecated. Use `SugarQuery::joinTable()` instead. You can specify aliases and join types using parameters that will allow you to continue to specify any custom join.
  - `SugarQuery::compileSql()` is deprecated. Use `SugarQuery::execute()` instead or use `$query->compile()->getSQL()` and `$query>compile()->getParameters()`. Executed SQL can also be viewed in sugarcrm.log by adjusting the Sugar log level to DEBUG or INFO.
  - The `$execute` parameter on `DBManager::insertParams()` is deprecated. In the future, `insertParams()` will always execute.
  - The `$execute` parameter on `DBManager::updateParams()` is deprecated. In the future, `updateParams()` will always execute.
  - The `$where` parameter on `SugarBean::update()` is deprecated. This parameter is not necessary.
  - `DBManager::delete()` is deprecated. Use `SugarBean::mark_deleted()` instead.
  - `DBManager::retrieve()` is deprecated. Use `SugarBean::retrieve()` instead.
  - `DBManager::insertSQL()` is deprecated. Use `DBManager::insert()` instead.
  - `DBManager::updateSQL()` is deprecated. Use `DBManager::update()` instead.
  - `DBManager::deleteSQL()` is deprecated. Use `SugarBean::mark_deleted()` instead.
  - `DBManager::retrieveSQL() is deprecated. Use `DBManager::retrieve()` instead.`
  - `DBManager::preparedQuery()`, `DBManager::pQuery()`, `DBManager::prepareQuery()`, `DBManager::prepareTypeData()`, and `DBManager::prepareStatement()` have been deprecated. These `DBManager` methods are no longer necessary.
- The `jssource` directory which contained copies of JavaScript sources has been removed from Sugar. Unminified JavaScript sources are available at their home locations such as under the `clients`, `include/javascript`, or `sidecar` directories. For more information, refer to this [Developer Blog post](https://developer.sugarcrm.com/2016/04/04/handling-of-javascript-files-in-sugar-7-7/).
- JSONP support for v4\_1 REST API and earlier versions is now disabled by default. A new config option `jsonp_web_service_enabled` should be set to `true` to enable JSONP support on these API versions.

Changes in release 7.7.2.0 which may affect developers include the following:


- The News dashlet has been disabled in this release since it relied on the Google News Search API which has been [deprecated since 2011](https://developers.google.com/news-search/ "Google News"). Any code that relied on this News dashlet or the Google News Search API will need to be updated to use an [alternative news API](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_news_media_APIs "List of News APIs").
- Some `PreviewLayout` metadata customizations that were non-functional in 7.7.0 have been corrected.
- Sidecar math functions will now return strings instead of numbers in order to improve the way Sidecar handles math and currency values. This will prevent floating point errors, specifically when dealing with currencies. The improved implementation relies on the `big.js` version 3.1.3 library that was introduced in this release.

## Run health checker and fix all errors

Prior to attempting to upgrade to any 7.x release, Sugar recommends using the Health Check tool. The health check will notify you of any issues within your instance which will affect your ability to upgrade to your target version. For more information on running the health check, please refer to the Installation and Upgrade Guide specific to your version and edition of Sugar.

Download [health checker](url) and run it.

## Backup or rewrite core changes

If your build sources are GIT driven ("sugarcrm/Mango" fork) find all your core changes and (if possible) rewrite them in upgrade safe way. This way you'll avoid merge conflicts during the upgrade.
If it's not possible be sure to track and backup such changes. There is a big chance some of them:
- are implemented by core dev team in the version you plan to upgrade to
- make no sense anymore
- cause additional issues on its own (for example require missing file)
